---
layout: post
title: "LQ Vol 1 Issue 1 Article 7: Reading Study"
date: 2013-08-14 10:21
comments: true
categories: [LQ Autoethno Field Notes, research]
---

**Preface:**

This post is part of a series of field notes on an
autoethnographic reading of [*The Library
Quarterly*](http://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/journals/journal/lq.html).
The collection can be accessed by visiting the following link:

[http://sweb.uky.edu/~csbu225/blog/categories/lq-autoethno-field-notes/](http://sweb.uky.edu/~csbu225/blog/categories/lq-autoethno-field-notes/)

For an explanation of the project, see:

[http://sweb.uky.edu/~csbu225/blog/2013/07/19/authoethnography-abstract/](http://sweb.uky.edu/~csbu225/blog/2013/07/19/authoethnography-abstract/)

**Reading and Posting Guide:**

My comments, writings, etc. begin with the term **Note**. Each new
thought begins with that term. Follow up paragraphs, if any, will
not.

My reflections will begin with the term **Reflection**. These may
usually be posted toward the end of the post, but may also be
interspersed throughout the document. I'll see how it goes.

If I am quoting a term, I may quote it within a **Note**, that is,
within my text. If I am quoting a phrase, a sentence, or something
longer, I will quote it as a block quote.

All quotes are assumed to be by the author of the paper under
investigation. If I quote another source, I will add the author's
name, year, and page number after that quote: e.g., (Author, Year,
p. n).

Because these are notes, they are not heavily edited for grammar.

---

This entry is about:

Drinkwater, Geneva. (1931). Three Hundred Days in Roman Libraries.
*The Library Quarterly, 1*(1), 67-71.
url:[http://www.jstor.org/stable/40039630](http://www.jstor.org/stable/40039630)

---

**Note:** The seventh article published in *The Library Quarterly*
is titled "Three Hundred Days in Roman Libraries." It was authored
by Geneva Drinkwater, who was affiliated with the University of
Chicago.

**Note:** This is a very delightful account about, as the title
suggests, a trip to Roman libraries. It begins with a trip to the
"Santa Scolastica in Subiaco," a monastery where St. Benedict
lived, and ends at the Vatican library. Although very brief, the
piece is a wonderful description of Geneva Drinkwater's experience
oversees. There are few descriptions of the libraries, but that's
not the focus.

Perhaps because I was intrigued by the name, I did a quick web
search for Geneva Drinkwater and have discovered that this is the
kind of person who makes good history (read her bio below).
Actually, it's a nice reminder that behind every paper I read,
there's a person. That may seem obvious, but it's easy to read
papers without thinking about the author. That's, actually, part
of the point with scientific authorship. I'd have to look it up,
but I think that point was made by either Robert K. Merton or
Derek J. de Solla Price.

Here are a couple of brief biographies and the second link
contains a link to an oral history that she is reading:

- [http://lib.rollins.edu/olin/oldsite/archives/golden/Drinkwater.htm](http://lib.rollins.edu/olin/oldsite/archives/golden/Drinkwater.htm)  

- [http://www.wppl.org/wphistory/drinkwater.html](http://www.wppl.org/wphistory/drinkwater.html)

I was quite happy to discover that Drinkwater and I both went to
school at the same place (University of Missouri) and worked at
the same place (Stephens College).

**Note:** Study update: I'm altering the name of the title of
these posts from Autoethnographic Study to Reading Study. The
reason is that these readings will be useful for other purposes.
