---
layout: post
title: "LQ Vol 1 Issue 1 Article 3: Autoethnographic Study"
date: 2013-07-22 13:43
comments: true
categories: [LQ Autoethno Field Notes, research]
---

For an explanation of this post, see:
[Preface](/blog/2013/08/14/lq-autoethnography-research-journal-preface/)

---

This entry is about:

Keppel, F. P. (1931). The Carnegie Corporation and the Graduate
Library School: A Historical Outline. *The Library Quarterly,
1*(1), 22-25.
url:[http://www.jstor.org/stable/40039626](http://www.jstor.org/stable/40039626)

---

**Note:** The third article published in *The Library Quarterly*
is titled "The Carnegie Corporation and the Graduate Library
School." It was written by F. P. Keppel, who was affiliated with:

**Affiliation:** Carnegie Corporation

**Note:** It dawns on me that I do not know how many library
schools started with an endowment, whether by a corporation or an
organization such as the Carnegie Corporation.

**Note:** Interesting quote about the intent to fund a library
school at Chicago:

> The Corporation recognized that there was already in existence a
> number of library schools of excellent professional standing,
> but in their judgment there was no school which could be said to
> occupy for the librarian's profession a position analogous to
> that of the Harvard Law School or the John Hopkins Medical
> School (p. 23).

**Note:** The article is fairly straightforward and is very much,
as its title suggests, an outline. After the above quote, Keppel
lists a number of reasons for choosing the University of Chicago
as the place to create a new school (I'm not going to list these
reasons here, but I may want to come back to them later), he
summarizes the negotiations between the University and the
Corporation about the funding, and then he summarizes the
University's process in establishing the school.

**Reflection:** As I commented in my previous post, such an
article could have easily gone into an issue of the *Library
Journal*, as it's primarily a note. However, when I remind myself
that this is the inaugural issue of the *LQ*, which is published
by the University of Chicago, then this short *outline* takes on
new meaning:

When I look at the table of contents of a scholarly journal that
launches in more recent times, the articles listed usually (it
seems to me) are research articles. The fact that the *LQ* does
not (so far) have any research articles suggests something about
the broader state of affairs at the time. Such that, the research
culture (as [Williamson explains][1]) just didn't exist for
library science at the time (we know that to be pretty much
true---as we understand research today, at least).

Given Williamson's article, this first issue by *this* journal,
this brief outline about the creation of the library school at
Chicago and the Carnegie Corporation's involvement, the launching
of this journal is very much itself an argument about the need for
a **library science**. Said otherwise, this journal's coming into
being is very much an act of **creating** a library science. And
it makes sense that the University of Chicago is the source of the
first research journal in library science, given the intent behind
the quote above (the creation of an **esteemed** library school,
the likes of which should resemble something akin to Harvard Law).
Perhaps then, the Carnegie Corporation should not only "take the
credit---or accept the responsibility" (p. 23) for all the public
libraries it built but for also, in some way, creating the
opportunity for a library science to exist. (That "credit" or
"responsibility" quote is in the article but I use it, tongue in
cheek, out of context.)

**Reflection:** That I need to remind myself that this is the
inaugural issue, as I did above, is something that itself has
special import. While my goal with this project is to get a sense
of the journal as a thing in and of itself, a thing that has its
own identity, that is historically situated, and that has
contributed substantially to the identify of the field, I also
have to try to read this journal *fresh*---from the viewpoint of
someone who is reading this journal for the first time in 1931,
when it was published. If I forget to do that, then I will lose
something in the experience or the reading, or I will not notice
things that may have been noticed or thought of by readers at the
time it was published.

[1]: /blog/2013/07/19/lq-vol-1-issue-1-article-1-autoethnographric-study/
