---
layout: post
title: "LQ Vol 1 Issue 1 Article 2: Autoethnographic Study"
date: 2013-07-22 07:09
comments: true
categories: 
categories: [LQ Autoethno Field Notes, research, Author-Putnam, Affil-Library of Congress]
---

For an explanation of this post, see:
[Preface](/blog/2013/08/14/lq-autoethnography-research-journal-preface/)

---

This entry is about:

Putnam, Herbert. (1931). Consultants at the National Library. *The
Library Quarterly, 1*(1), 18-21.
url:[http://www.jstor.org/stable/40039625](http://www.jstor.org/stable/40039625)

---

**Note:** The second article published in *The Library Quarterly*
is titled "Consultants at the National Library." It was written by
Herbert Putnam, who was affiliated with:

**Affiliation:** Library of Congress

At the time of this publication, he was head of the Library of
Congress, one of the last **librarians** to have this role.

**Note:** Putnam refers to the field as *library economy*,
indicating the original term for the field. As noted, Williamson,
in the first *LQ* article, uses the term *library service*, and
discusses *library science* as a field and term. The use of so
many terms signifies, I think, the number of great changes
happening in librarianship at the time.

**Note:** It is interesting that Putnam refers to reference work
as "the more popular" aspect of librarianship. That seemed true up
till six or seven years ago. I wonder, though, if it's still true.
My sense is that other forms of librarianship are growing in
popularity.

**Note:** The first article in *LQ* is a reprint or first print of
a speech given by C. C. Williamson. This second article is mostly
an informative piece, with a bit of commentary and discussion,
about the use of expert consultants (faculty specializing in
certain fields of study) at the Library of Congress. Two articles
into my reading of the *LQ*, I'm aware that neither is a research
article. I mention this because the *Library Journal* had been
providing the function of informing and providing a discussion
board to the library community about such topics since 1876. In
the first two articles of this journal, the *LQ* has yet to become
its own thing -- still mimicking the function the *Library
Journal* has provided since its founding. I wonder how many
articles I'll read before I get a sense that the *Library
Quarterly* has begun to truly develop its own identity.

**Note:** Although Putnam's article is short, it is a loaded topic
and touches upon the core of what it means to be a librarian at a
research library. At heart, the issue is about the beneficial use
of having subject specialists (i.e., faculty, professors,
researchers, etc. and not librarians), who are familiar not only
with the subjects of their fields but also the research methods
used in those fields, work at libraries to aid in collection
development and provide advanced library service to the public or
the community at hand. The article reflects the state of library
education (and the librarian as a professional) at the time, which
was before C. C. Williamson's report (**The Williamson Report** of
1923) and which recommended graduate study, had the ability to
truly have an effect on the state of library education (see ["In
the Beginning
...](http://www.ala.org/offices/hrdr/librarysupportstaff/history_of_library_support_staff).
Although it should be mentioned that the Graduate Library School
of the University of Chicago had already been founded by this
time, and it would have a major impact on the state of library
education as graduate study.

Putnam refers to the practice of librarianship as a "technique"
(p. 19). It is interesting to compare this piece with the previous
one written by Williamson, who is arguing that librarianship can
be much more than a technique. Putnam, then, and at least based on
this piece, seems to have a growingly challenged (or obsolete?)
view of librarianship (for the time?). Odd to write that given his
historical influence.

**Reflection:** From a historical perspective, the subject matter
of this article is interesting. However, my main interest with
this project is reflected in the note above about the becoming of
*LQ* as a research journal. When will this happen? The next
article? The next issue or volume? When will the *LQ* mature and
become the research journal it has been for most of its lifetime?
What kind of research will I encounter? Will it be social science
(doubtful), historical, ...? My guess is that *LQ*'s becoming will
reflect librarianship's (or library science's) own becoming. In
fact, this is largely my (so-called) hypothesis.
