---
layout: post
title: "Green OA and Academic Libraries"
date: 2013-11-30 09:23
comments: true
categories: [academic libraries, green open access, scholarly communication, research]
---

Will have to figure out a workflow from RStudio to Octopress.
Until then, some comments related to my dissertation and a link to
the code on RPubs:

[http://rpubs.com/seancsb/libsoa](http://rpubs.com/seancsb/libsoa)

For my [dissertation](http://hdl.handle.net/10355/37582), I used
data from CiteULike to estimate the probability of being able to
use Google Scholar to retrieve full text (or open access or OA)
scholarly journal articles without the benefit of or access to a
library's scholarly databases and journal subscriptions. The
purpose was to understand how libraries are fairing in a world
where journal articles are increasingly freely available (e.g., as
OA) and, jointly, where people, including scholars / researchers,
are increasingly using search engines such as Google Scholar.
Fundamentally, is it possible for a serious researcher to function
without the benefit of access to a library's services?

It is an important question because for the last century, the
academic library was the main source of access to scholarly
literature (not the only source, certainly). In the last 20 years,
though, the web has raised our expectations concerning what should
be freely available. And whether right or wrong, the expectation
that everything (all data) should be freely available with a mouse
click has been increasing. With these rising expectations and with
corresponding changes in scholarly information seeking activities,
the future of the academic library is subject to quite a bit of
change.

Without taking into consideration the context of the study, the
results from Part 1 (see link above) seem to suggest that open
access journal articles receive more citations than articles that
are not freely available. But since the data is based on
references saved in CiteULike and bibliometric data collected from
Google Scholar, what it more accurately suggests is that, at the
very least, CiteULike users are more likely to collect and use
articles that are freely available.

The take away, at this point, has interesting implications for
academic libraries. The implication is that open access (or simply
freely accessible) articles have such a high payoff, given the
previously mentioned expectations and changing information seeking
patterns, over articles that are not freely available, they will
be more likely retrieved and used over articles that are not
freely available. The implication for the acacemic library can be
stated as a rhetorical question: why use the academic library if I
can use Google Scholar to retrieve open access or freely
accessible articles?

There may be no reason to use the academic library if such is the
case and if the case eventually offers even higher payoffs (more
OA, e.g.). But then, what is the role of the academic library?
Well, one important part of the answer comes from where those OA
articles originate. That is, where is Google Scholar retrieving
these articles from? In Part 2 (see link above), we see that the
university (a label I use to describe a variety of hosting
services, but most importantly and most predominately,
university-hosted subject and institutional repositories) is the
main source of open access articles (Green OA). In the 2012 part
of this study (which is longitudinal: 2010 - 2012), 145
universities provided 199 open access articles. This accounted for
38% points of the articles that were freely available in
2012 (58% of the articles were OA by 2012).
