---
layout: post
title: "History of a Profession"
date: 2013-06-17 12:51
comments: true
categories: [librarianship, lis-history, professions]
---

I'm one of the conveners of the ALISE [Historical Perspectives
SIG](http://alisehistsig.wordpress.com/) and, due to that role,
I'm excited that I am able to join a committee to help out with
some work related to [ALISE](http://www.alise.org/)'s centennial
conference in January 2015. It dawned on me, after I joined this
committee, that I knew very little about ALISE's history, even
though I've been wanting to know more. In order to rectify that,
last week I picked up what seems to be the seminal work on this
topic:

[The Association of American Library Schools, 1915-1968: An Analytical History](http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/detail?accno=ED088503) / by Donald Gordon Davis. 1974.

I've only read through chapter two, but it's a great read so far.
It's going to serve me well on another project that I'm starting
-- one that's also related to the history of librarianship and
library and information science. More on that after I submit it as
a conference proposal.

It's really eye-opening to read about early to mid-twentieth
century librarianship, information science, and documentation. At
some point, I'll write a post about why --- but in a nutshell,
much of what the field does today was defined by the people and
the circumstances then. Not so much has changed as we sometimes
like to imagine.

Some of my favorite, related works include:

Bradford, S. C. (1950). [Documentation][1]. Washington: Public
Affairs Press.

[1]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/12422162

Bush, Vannevar. (1970). [Pieces of the Action][2]. New York:
Morrow.

[2]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/12438768

Farkas-Conn, I. S. (1990). [From Documentation to Information
Science: The Beginnings and Early Development of the American
Documentation Institute - American Society for Information
Science][3]. New York: Greenwood Press.

[3]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/12357391

Hamlin, Arthur T. (1981). [The University Library in the United
States: Its Origins and Development][4]. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.

[4]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/12128054

Price, Derek J. De Solla. (1986). [Little Science, Big
Science...and Beyond][5]. Columbia: Columbia University Press.

[5]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/6106458

Shiflett, Orvin L. (1981). [Origins of American Academic
Librarianship][6]. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Co. 

[6]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/12128074

Williams, R. V., & Lipetz, Ben-Ami. (Eds.). (2005). [Covert and
Overt: Recollecting and Connecting Intelligence Service and
Information Science][7]. Medford, NJ: Information Today.

[7]: http://www.citeulike.org/user/seancsb/article/12357391
