---
layout: post
title: "Authoethnography Abstract"
date: 2013-07-19 15:06
comments: true
categories: [LQ Autoethno Field Notes, research]
---

This is an abstract I submitted for the next ALISE conference. I
won't know if it will be accepted for a couple more months, and
since it's not a double peer blind review process, I see no
problem posting it now.

I'm posting this abstract for a specific reason. This site will
function as a place for my field notes on the project. Since I'm
about to add my first set of notes, it seems important to explain
the reason for those notes, before I begin posting them, in case
the process might be useful to someone.

## Title: The Scholarly Journal and Disciplinary Identity: An Autoethnographic Reading of The Library Quarterly

### Introduction

Scholarly journals play important roles in the dissemination of
information and knowledge. However, beginning with the early days
of science, journals have had other forms of influence (Price,
1986; Hunter, 2010). In particular, journals have contributed to
the "building of scientific communities" (Functions of Scientific
Journals section, para 3, Schaffner, 1994), and this has been true
for the field we now call library and information science (LIS).

In LIS, the journal has played an important role in identity
formation since the founding of the *Library Journal* (1876).
Approximately 55 years later, the founding of several scholarly
and technical journals, including *The Library Quarterly* (1931),
the *Journal of Documentary Reproduction* (1938), which would
later and in a roundabout way evolve into *JASIS&amp;T*
(Farkas-Conn, 1990), and *College and Research Libraries* (1939),
created additional outlets for the "publication of professional
problems" (Hamlin, p. 60, 1981). For Hamlin, the addition of these
journals signified a decade of wonders for librarians. They helped
usher in modern librarianship, evolve areas such as information
science from documentation, and provide a cultural record of the
efforts made by the people involved – something to refer to and to
identify with as members of a community.

### Methodology

This study employs an autoethnographic reading of the first four
volumes of the *The Library Quarterly* (*LQ*). This includes a
reading of 16 issues and 120 articles published in the 1931
through 1934 volumes. The autoethnographic approach, in this
study, involves describing what it means to be a researcher and an
educator in a field where scholarly journals played an important
role in shaping the identity of the field. The goal is twofold: to
develop a richer understanding of what journals mean for our
professional identity, and to develop a framework that will enable
future research of how other disciplines were shaped by journals.

Autoethnography is the chosen research design because the act of
examining a LIS journal, in its role as an identity shaper, is the
self-conscious and reflexive act of a participant observer (Ellis,
Adams, &amp; Bochner, 2011) – that is, a member of the community
who is studying the community and its history. Two versions of
autoethnographic research have been developed: evocative
autoethnography and analytic autoethnography. Evocative
autoethnography emphasizes "evocation as a goal, for one, and
writing narratively, for another" (Ellis &amp; Bochner, p. 432,
2006). Analytical autoethnography, like its evocative counterpart,
"seeks narrative fidelity \[... and\] is grounded in
self-experience but reaches beyond it as well" (Anderson, p. 386,
2006). Since one purpose of this study is to understand, broadly,
how journals have contributed to disciplinary identity, analytical
autoethnography is the chosen research design.

Autoethnographic research in LIS is rare (Michels, 2012) and
autoethnographic readings of texts may be more common but are rare
also. Kaufmann's (2005) "autotheoretical \[sic\] reading of
Foucault" (p. 577) provides a reference point for this study. In
that study, Kaufmann interrupts her

> theoretical interpretations of Foucault with autoethnographic
> pieces, textual vignettes of my life gathered through journal
> entries and books read \[... which\] function as illustrations
> and / or counterpoints to my summary of Foucault's theories (p.
> 577).

Inspired by Kaufmann (2005), this study functions as an
autohistorical, rather than an autotheoretical, reading of *LQ*.
By this I mean I will include historical interpretations, grounded
in readings of our field's literature, of the first 120 articles
in *LQ* with textual reflections of my experiences as a new
researcher and educator within LIS. Since data will be collected
in this way, my field notes will be public and accessible at
[http://www.cseanburns.net/journal/blog/categories/lq-autoethno-field-notes/](http://www.cseanburns.net/journal/blog/categories/lq-autoethno-field-notes/).

### Motivation

The motivation for this study originates from recent trends in
scholarly communication and what these trends mean for the
sciences, broadly defined. Specifically, despite the important
role journals have had in creating communities and shaping
identities, problems associated with the serials crisis and
developments in emerging technologies have resulted in some
researchers calling for an end to the genre. The arguments include
a move to the article as a complete product in itself and to a
market-based, decentralized infrastructure (Priem &amp; Hemminger,
2012) where identification, publication, storage, assessment,
marketing, search, and preparation are taken over by entities
other than the journal (Priem, 2013). In some cases, re-envisioned
publishing models are challenging the traditional journal genre,
too. PeerJ, for example, is a recent open access platform that
charges authors a small, one time fee. Articles are published when
they are ready, and authors are allowed to publish as much as they
desire over the course of their lifetime for no additional charge.
The relevant requirement is that all authors assume peer review
duties at least once per year (Van Noorden, 2012).

Whether the rhetoric exhibited among the proponents of these
trends is convincing, the arguments valid, or the outcomes
overwhelmingly desired by the people involved in research
activities, it is true that many researchers are becoming more
interested in adopting new dissemination technologies (Tatum &amp;
Jankowski, 2013) or are required to communicate their data, their
products, and their reports in more comprehensive ways (Piwowar,
2013). These interests and requirements are already having a
disruptive influence on the scholarly communication system (Cope
&amp; Kalantzis, 2009).

Though the journal’s end time is not likely near, the scholarly
communication system seems destined to have an increasingly
dynamic future. Also, while adoption of radical new methods of
communication may be more appropriate for some forms of science,
the state of affairs does beg for reflection on what the journal
has done for community. In the process, it will be important to
know what, if anything, is lost for the culture of science if the
journal is eventually dismissed.

Another aspect to consider is that an extreme focus on the
article’s importance, at the cost of the journal’s, suggests
implications with regards to the continued division of the reading
unit. Tatum and Jankowski (2013) note that some open access
publishers provide formats of articles that direct 

> reader attention to specific components of an article rather
> than an all-encompassing presentation or argument \[.... and\]
> away from the traditional linear structure of the scholarly
> journal article to an almost postmodern conception of the
> article emphasizing visual, multiple modes of presentation and
> online dynamic updating (p. 203).

What will be interesting to know and discuss is not only how such
presentation and emphasis impacts community identity, but also how
our interaction with the literature is constrained by a
predominately query, subject, aboutness, and relevance based
framework rather than one that is culturally based --- information
as increasingly atomized thing (datum) instead of information as a
cultural product with a historical narrative.

### References

Anderson, L. (2006). Analytic autoethnography. Journal of
Contemporary Ethnography, 35(4), 373-395.
doi:[10.1177/0891241605280449](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0891241605280449)

Cope, W., &amp; Kalantzis, M. (2009). Signs of epistemic
disruption: Transformations in the knowledge system of the
academic journal. First Monday, 14(4).
doi:[10.5210/fm.v14i4.2309](http://dx.doi.org/10.5210/fm.v14i4.2309)

Ellis, C., &amp; Bochner, A. P. (2011). Analyzing analytic
autoethnography: An autopsy. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography,
35(4), 429-449.
doi:[10.1177/0891241606286979](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0891241606286979)

Ellis C., Adams, T. E., &amp; Bochner, A. P. (2011).
Autoethnography: An overview. Historical Social Research, 36(4),
271-290.
url:[http://www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/1589/3095](http://www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/1589/3095)

Farkas-Conn, I. S. (1990). From Documentation to Information
Science: The Beginnings and Early Development of the American
Documentation Institute – American Society for Information
Science. New York: Greenwood Press.
url:[http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/20671864](http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/20671864)

Hamlin, A. T. (1981). The University Library in the United States:
Its Origins and Development. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press. Hunter, M. (2010). The great experiment: The
Royal Society. History Today, 60(11), 34-40.
url:[http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/7276988](http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/7276988)

Michels, D. H. (2010). The place of the person in LIS research: An
exploration in methodology and representation. The Canadian
Journal of Information and Library Science, 34(2), 161-183.
doi:[10.1353/ils.0.0001](http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/ils.0.0001)

Piwowar, H. (2013). Altmetrics: Vale all research products.
Nature, 493(159).
doi:[10.1038/493159a](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/493159a)

Price, D. J. D. S. (1986). Little Science, Big Science... and
Beyond. Columbia: Columbia University Press.
url:[http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/12555885](http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/12555885)

Priem, J., &amp; Hemminger, B. (2012). Decoupling the scholarly
journal. Frontiers in Computation Neuroscience, 6(19).
doi:[10.3389/fncom.2012.00019](http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2012.00019)

Priem, J. (2013). Scholarship: Beyond the paper. Nature,
495(7442).
doi:[10.1038/495437a](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/495437a)

Schaffner, A. C. (1994). The future of scientific journals:
Lessons from the past. Information Technology and Libraries,
13(4).
url:[http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/detail?accno=EJ496591](http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/detail?accno=EJ496591)

Tatum, C., &amp; Jankowski, N. W. (2013). Beyond open access: A
Framework for openness in scholarly communication. In P. Wouters,
A. Beaulieu, A. Scharnhorst, & S. Wyatt (Eds.), Virtual Knowledge:
Experimenting in the Humanities and the social sciences (pp. 183 –
218). Cambridge: MIT Press.
url:[http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/792941486](http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/792941486)

Van Noorden, R. (2012). Journal offers flat fee for 'all you can
publish.' Nature, 486(7402).
doi:[10.1038/48616a](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/48616a)
