---
layout: post
title: "KM and Archivists"
date: 2014-04-04 17:20:34 -0400
comments: true
categories: [academic libraries, knowledge management, LIS658]
---

**Preface:**

This semester I am teaching a knowledge management (KM) course. I
will be posting entries throughout the semester that describe,
critique, summarize, outline, etc. KM articles that my students
are not reading. The purpose here is to leverage the amount of
material I can expose them to.

**Article under discussion:**

This post is about:

Yakel, E. (2000). Knowlege management: The archivist's and records
manager's perspective. *International Management Journal, 34*(3),
24-30. [Link to an openly accessible version on
thefreelibrary.com](http://www.thefreelibrary.com/KNOWLEDGE+MANAGEMENT%3A+The+Archivist%27s+and+Records+Manager%27s...-a064715515)

The article was picked after a simple web search for these terms:
**knowledge management archivists** and selecting the article
after recognizing the author's name.

**Notes and discussion:**

I haven't read any literature before that discusses both archival
work and knowledge management, and I told someone I would try to
find an article that covers both areas. The article I selected
turned out to be a little surprising. Rather than an article about
how archivists manage their own knowledge within their own
organizations, which is what I expected to find for no apparent
reason, the article turned out to be about how archivists and
records managers can use their skills to enhance knowledge
management within their organizations and also, how doing so would
be strategically advantageous for them.

The article beings by arguing that archivists and records managers
should make sure to develop a perception of themselves as more
than "information providers and curators of data" (p. 24) and to
take advantage of new ways of visualizing their mission in order
to promote organizational learning. The key here is
**organizational learning**.

For example:

> Records management professionals must therefore become aware of
> how and when records are used --- and could be used --- rather
> than merely managing them (p. 27).

There is a big challenge here, and it's largely the same challenge
librarians face. Yakel points out that a significant amount if not
the majority of information and knowledge sharing happens in face
to face and similar social interactions. Thus, for records
management professionals and archivists, "the real challenge" is 

> to insinuate themselves into such conversations (p. 28).

And to do so using the documentary system that they are
responsible for and have mastery over. It is, as Yakel notes, a
powerful position, but figuring out how to add this material into
the work flow is no easy task.

In fact, it highlights the difficulty of what to do with not just
explicit, codified knowledge (i.e., making sure that knowledge is
easily found, used, and so forth), but of what to do with
explicit, codified knowledge that has aged and has been forgotten
about for some reason or other.

In the end, the challenge for archivists, records managers, and
even librarians is how to make the codified knowledge that they
are responsible for seem as alive, relevant, and pertinent to
their respective communities as the more social day to day
interaction seems.
