---
layout: post
title: "Academic Libraries and Knowledge Management"
date: 2014-01-31 17:32
comments: true
categories: [academic libraries, knowledge management, LIS658]
---

**Preface:**

This semester I am teaching a knowledge management (KM) course. I
will be posting entries throughout the semester that describe,
critique, summarize, etc. KM articles that my students *are not*
reading. The purpose here is to leverage the amount of material I
can expose them to.

**Article under discussion:**

This post is about:

Daneshgar, Farhad, &amp; Parirokh, Mehri. (2012). An integrated
customer knowledge management framework for academic libraries.
*Library Quarterly, 82*(1), 7-28.
doi:[10.1086/662943](http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/662943)

The article was picked at random.

**Notes and discussion:**

The article begins by acknowledging the competition that academic
libraries face in today's environment. In the sense that the
authors acknowledge this competition, I am in agreement. I am more
wary of the use of the term *customers* though and therefore will
be wary of some of the assumptions I'm guessing the authors will
make. There is also a sense, based on the abstract, that the
authors do not review academic library literature in detail ---
they make a point of having reviewed the knowledge management (KM)
literature.

The authors note that the knowledge generated by librarians and
library users should be captured.

The authors' research question:

> How can the existing bulk of customer knowledge accumulated in
> many of today's academic libraries be used in more effective
> ways?

The authors define the three main types of academic library
*customers*:

- undergraduate students
- postgraduate students
- academics (p. 9)

Essential (for their study) observation:

> In knowledge economies, customers do not simply make up a
> passive audience but rather are active knowledge partners (p.
> 9).

The authors will need to defend this statement -- especially the
second half of the sentence:

> We believe that despite considerable efforts in libraries to
> manage information from their clients (e.g., [3]), a lack of
> "market-orientation" focus and associated research perspective
> may be one of the reasons for underutilization of various types
> of the customer's knowledge in many of today's organizations,
> including the academic libraries (p. 9).

**Note:** After reading the article, the authors do not extend
upon or defend the above statement. Since the above statement
seems to be the major justification for this study, it really does
need a defense (i.e., some evidence to support it). See the end of
this post where I make explicit some of the assumptions in the
above statement and in this article.

In the section *Definition of Customer Knowledge* (p. 10), the
authors list three classes of this type of knowledge:

- Knowledge about Customers (KAC)
- Knowledge from Customers (KRC)
- Knoweldge for Customers (KFC)

They briefly describe *customer knowledge management systems*
(CKMS). These helps manage activities related to customer
knowledge management (CKM).

The authors proceed to lay out the details of the case study,
which includes a description of an Australian academic library.

After describing the departments and units in the library, which
includes some description of work flow, the authors break their
research question into the following three components:

> 1. How can the existing bulk of customers' knowledge available
> in academic libraries be organized?
> 2. How can this knowledge be used effectively?
> 3. How can the benefits of CKM in academic libraries be
> evaluated (p. 14)?

In the model displayed in figure 4, it's not clear, to me at
least, why the Knowledge Sharing &amp; Dissemination element is
labeled as tacit knowledge.

On page 18, the authors parenthetically "define" tacit knowledge
as knowledge that is "generally understood" and "taken for
granted" (p. 18).

The authors discuss the "categorization scheme" and refer to this
as a "*customer knowledge taxonomy*." They write that

> the aim of the taxonomy is to provide a formal and explicit
> specification of a shared conceptualization of customer
> knowledge, which among other things, will circumvent the
> problems created by the multiple knowledge maps that the
> librarians will have (p. 16).

It's a little difficult to follow, but it appears that the
elements in the initial model (figure 3) and the revised model
(figure 4) represent the taxonomy discussed on page 16. However,
these categories are introduced on page 10 and in such a way that
it implies that these categories are pre-existing. The authors
write:

> From an organizational perspective, customers' knowledge can be
> categorized into at least the following three classes (p. 10).

And they then describe KAC, KRC, and KFC (see above). 

So KAC, KRC, and KFC are the coding schemes used to analyze and
label each "'customer call report'" (p. 19). The authors went
through quite a bit of work to examine these reports and label
parts of the sentences or sentences that could be identified as
relevant to the category. Even though they write that each of
these three categories were subdivided into tacit and explicit
knowledge, it's not clear how the subclasses were used in practice
for the call reports.

The authors do not review library related literature (there are
one or two library related journals in the references).

**Note:** What follows is the essential argument, rationale, etc.
in this paper:

The authors mention theoretical framework and theory a few times,
but they leave details unsaid. The implicit theory is that
academic libraries should be viewed as participants in a market.
And as participants in a market, they exchange goods and services
with their "customers," which include undergraduate students,
postgraduate students, and academics. The goods and services that
are exchanged, according to my explanation of their theoretical
understanding, is knowledge. Knowledge then is given to students
and academics, in regards to their information needs, and
knowledge is received from students and academics. The received
knowledge is internalized by librarians and used in later
"transactions" (I don't believe the authors actually use that
term). Leaving the knowledge internalized (or tacit), however,
means that the librarians are failing fully to "capitalize" (I'm
being consistent in my translation of their underlying framework)
on the knowledge they receive from their customers (who are
"active knowledge partners"). To capitalize on the received
knowledge, the librarians must be able to code that knowledge.
When the coding scheme, or classification, (knowledge from
customers, knowledge for customers, knowledge about customers) is
applied to reports of exchanges between librarians and their
"customers," (the taxonomy), the result is a customer knowledge
management system.

In short, the KM as applied in this paper has a theory and the
theory is simply this: **knowledge is a commodity**.

While I have some issues with how this report is presented (it
could have been a bit more linear), a basic refutation of this
paper (or acceptance of it) will involve addressing the above
proposition.

**Note:** I'd have to come back to it, but I have not addressed
how well the authors answered their research question, or the
three questions that were derived from their main one.
